A set of rules used to define a language - the structure of the strings in the language.

To describe a grammar for a language, two collections of alphabets (symbols) are necessary.
- Terminals - symbols from which all strings in the language are made, or symbols of a 'given' alphabet for a generated language (usually lower-case letters).
- Non terminals - temporary symbols (disjoint from terminals) used to define the grammar replacement rules (in the production rules). These must all be replaced by terminals before the production can successfully make a valid string of the language (usually upper-case letters.)

Furthermore, a grammar for a language $L$ (over an alphabet $\Sigma$) consists of a set of grammar rules (productions) of the following form:
$\alpha \rightarrow \beta$  where $\alpha,\:\beta$ are strings of symbols taken from the set of terminals ($\Sigma$) and non-terminals.

Example: if $\Sigma$ = *{$a,\: b$}* and $S$ is a non-terminal symbol then the rules 
	$S \rightarrow\:$a$S,\: S \rightarrow \Lambda$ 
are examples of productions for a grammar $L$.

So a formal definite of a grammar is:
- An alphabet $T$ of symbols called **terminals** (identical to the alphabet of the resulting language).
- An alphabet $N$ of grammar symbols called **non-terminals** (used in the production rules).
- A specific non-terminal symbol called the **start symbol** (usually $S$).
- A finite set of productions of the form $\alpha \rightarrow \beta$, where $\alpha$ and $\beta$ are strings over the alphabet $N\: \cup\: T$.

A string made up of terminal (grammar) symbols and non-terminal symbols is called a sentential form.

To carry on with generation of strings, we introduce derivation.

**Derivation:**
If $x$ and $y$ are sentential forms and $\alpha \rightarrow \beta$ is a production, then the replacement of $\alpha$ by $\beta$ in $x\alpha y$ is called a derivation, and we denote it by writing
	$x\alpha y \rightarrow x\beta y$

**Formal definition of $L(G)$:**
The set of all strings (over terminal symbols) which can derived from the start symbol is the language generated by the grammar $G$.

If $G$ is a grammar with the start symbol $S$ and set of terminals $T$, then the language generated by $G$ is the following set:
	$L(G)$ = *{$s | s \in T^\ast$ and $S\rightarrow{^+} \: s$}*

**Infinite languages:**
Since there is no bound on the length of strings in an infinite language, there is no bound on the number of derivation steps used to derive the strings. If the grammar has $n$ productions, then any derivation consisting of $n + 1$ steps must use some production twice. Since the language is infinite, some production or sequence of productions must be used repeatedly to construct the derivation.

A production is called recursive if its left side occurs on its right side.
e.g. the production $S \rightarrow\:$a$S$ is recursive.
A grammar for an infinite language must be directly or indirectly recursive.

**Constructing grammars:**
Sometimes it is difficult or even impossible to write down a grammar for a given language. A language can also have more than one grammar.

If the number of strings in a language is finite, then a grammar can consists of all productions of the form $S \rightarrow w$ for each string $w$ in the language.

There is no universal method for finding a grammar for an infinite language, but combining grammars can be useful. 

**Combining grammars:**
Suppose $L$ and $M$ are languages for which we are able to find the grammars, there must then exist simple rules for creating grammars which produce the languages $L \cup M, L \cdot M$ and $L^\ast$. We can describe $L$ and $M$ with grammars having disjoint sets of non-terminals.

**Union rule:**
The union of two languages, $L \cup M$, starts with the two productions $S \rightarrow A | B$ followed by
- the grammar rules of $L$ (with the start symbol $A$) and
- $M$ (with the start symbol $B$)

Example: if we have the grammar 
	$K$ = *{$\Lambda$, a, b, aa, bb, aaa, bbb, ..., a$^n$, b$^n$, ... }*
then $K$ is the union of the two languages
	$L$ = *{a$^n | n \in \mathbb{N}$}* and $M$ = *{b$^n | n \in \mathbb{N}$}*
Thus we can write a grammar for $K$ as follows:
- $A \rightarrow \Lambda |$a$A$ (grammar for $L$),
- $B \rightarrow \Lambda |$b$B$ (grammar for $M$),
- $S \rightarrow A|B$ (union rule)

**Product rule:**
The product of two languages, $L \cdot M$, starts with the production $S \rightarrow AB$ followed by, as above, 
- the grammar rules of $L$ (with the start symbol $A$) and
- $M$ (with the start symbol $B$)

Example: if we have the grammar
	$K$ = *{a$^m$b$^n | m, n \in \mathbb{N}$}* = *{$\Lambda$, a, b, aa, ab, aaa, bb, ...}*
then $K$ is the product of the two languages
	$L$ = *{a$^n | n \in \mathbb{N}$}* and $M$ = *{b$^n | n \in \mathbb{N}$}*.
Thus we can write a grammar for $K$ as follows:
- $A \rightarrow \Lambda |$a$A$ (grammar for $L$),
- $B \rightarrow \Lambda |$b$B$ (grammar for $M$),
- $S \rightarrow AB$ (product rule)

**Closure rule:**
The grammar for the closure of a language, $L^\ast$, starts with the production 
	$S \rightarrow AS | \Lambda$
followed by
- the grammar rules of $L$ (started from $A$).

Example: if we want to construct the language of $L$ of all possible strings made up from zero or more occurrences of *aa* or *bb*.
	$L$ = *{aa, bb}$^\ast$* = $M^\ast$ (where $M$ = *{aa, bb}*)
So,
	$L$ = *{$\Lambda$, aa, bb, aaaa, aabb, bbbb, bbaa, ...}*
Thus we can write a grammar for $L$ as follows:
- $S \rightarrow AS | \Lambda$ (closure rule),
- $A \rightarrow$ aa|*bb* (grammar for *{aa, bb}*)

However, grammars are not unique. A given language can have many grammars which could produce it. We can simplify the previous grammar, for example, by:
- $A$ in $S \rightarrow AS \implies A \rightarrow$ *aa* to obtain $S \rightarrow\:$*aa*$S$
- $A$ in $S \rightarrow AS \implies A \rightarrow\:$*bb*$S$ 
This results in the final simplified grammar as:
	$S \rightarrow\:$*aa*$S$ | *bb*$S$ | $\Lambda$ 